docs/wiki/Key-Features.md, before:

- [Base Model](#base-model)
- [Callable Model](#callable-model)
- [Model Registry](#model-registry)
- [Models](#models)
- [Publishers](#publishers)
- [Evaluators](#evaluators)
- [Results](#results)

`ccflow` (Composable Configuration Flow) is a collection of tools for workflow configuration, orchestration, and dependency injection.
It is intended to be flexible enough to handle diverse use cases, including data retrieval, validation, transformation, and loading (i.e. ETL workflows), model training, microservice configuration, and automated report generation.

## Base Model

Central to `ccflow` is the `BaseModel` class.
`BaseModel` is the base class for models in the `ccflow` framework.
A model is basically a data class (class with attributes).
The naming was inspired by the open source library [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) (`BaseModel` actually inherits from the Pydantic base model class).

## Callable Model

`CallableModel` is the base class for a special type of `BaseModel` which can be called.
`CallableModel`'s are called with a context (something that derives from `ContextBase`) and returns a result (something that derives from `ResultBase`).
As an example, you may have a `SQLReader` callable model that when called with a `DateRangeContext` returns a `ArrowResult` (wrapper around a Arrow table) with data in the date range defined by the context by querying some SQL database.

## Model Registry

A `ModelRegistry` is a named collection of models.
A `ModelRegistry` can be loaded from YAML configuration, which means you can define a collection of models using YAML.
This is really powerful because this gives you a easy way to define a collection of Python objects via configuration.

## Models

Although you are free to define your own models (`BaseModel` implementations) to use in your flow graph,
`ccflow` comes with some models that you can use off the shelf to solve common problems. `ccflow` comes with a range of models for reading data.

The following table summarizes the available models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

## Publishers

`ccflow` also comes with a range of models for writing data.
These are referred to as publishers.
You can "chain" publishers and callable models using `PublisherModel` to call a `CallableModel` and publish the results in one step.
In fact, `ccflow` comes with several implementations of `PublisherModel` for common publishing use cases.

The following table summarizes the "publisher" models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

| Name                         | Path                | Description                                                                                                                                                 |
| :--------------------------- | :------------------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `DictTemplateFilePublisher`  | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to a file after populating a Jinja template.                                                                                                   |
| `GenericFilePublisher`       | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data using a generic "dump" Callable. Uses `smart_open` under the hood so that local and cloud paths are supported.                                 |
| `JSONPublisher`              | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to file in JSON format.                                                                                                                        |
| `PandasFilePublisher`        | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish a pandas data frame to a file using an appropriate method on pd.DataFrame. For large-scale exporting (using parquet), see `PandasParquetPublisher`. |
| `PicklePublisher`            | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to a pickle file.                                                                                                                              |
| `PydanticJSONPublisher`      | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish a pydantic model to a json file. See [Pydantic modeljson](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/serialization/#modelmodel_dump)                 |
| `YAMLPublisher`              | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to file in YAML format.                                                                                                                        |
| `CompositePublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Highly configurable, publisher that decomposes a pydantic BaseModel or a dictionary into pieces and publishes each piece separately.                        |
| `PrintPublisher`             | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data using python standard print.                                                                                                                     |
| `LogPublisher`               | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data using python standard logging.                                                                                                                   |
| `PrintJSONPublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data in JSON format.                                                                                                                                  |
| `PrintYAMLPublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data in YAML format.                                                                                                                                  |
| `PrintPydanticJSONPublisher` | `ccflow.publishers` | Print pydantic model as json. See https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/serialization/#modelmodel_dump_json                                             |
| `ArrowDatasetPublisher`      | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PandasDeltaPublisher`       | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `EmailPublisher`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MatplotlibFilePublisher`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MLFlowArtifactPublisher`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MLFlowPublisher`            | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PandasParquetPublisher`     | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PlotlyFilePublisher`        | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `XArrayPublisher`            | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |

## Evaluators

`ccflow` comes with "evaluators" that allows you to evaluate (i.e. run) `CallableModel` s in different ways.

The following table summarizes the "evaluator" models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

| Name                                | Path                | Description                                                                                                                    |
| :---------------------------------- | :------------------ | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `LazyEvaluator`                     | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that only actually runs the callable once an attribute of the result is queried (by hooking into `__getattribute__`) |
| `LoggingEvaluator`                  | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that logs information about evaluating the callable.                                                                 |
| `MemoryCacheEvaluator`              | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that caches results in memory.                                                                                       |
| `MultiEvaluator`                    | `ccflow.evaluators` | An evaluator that combines multiple evaluators.                                                                                |
| `GraphEvaluator`                    | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that evaluates the dependency graph of callable models in topologically sorted order.                                |
| `ChunkedDateRangeEvaluator`         | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ChunkedDateRangeResultsAggregator` | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayChunkedDateRangeEvaluator`      | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `DependencyTrackingEvaluator`       | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `DiskCacheEvaluator`                | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ParquetCacheEvaluator`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayCacheEvaluator`                 | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayGraphEvaluator`                 | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayDelayedDistributedEvaluator`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ParquetCacheEvaluator`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RetryEvaluator`                    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |

## Results

A Result is an object that holds the results from a callable model. It provides the equivalent of a strongly typed dictionary where the keys and schema are known upfront.

The following table summarizes the "result" models.

| Name                      | Path                     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| :------------------------ | :----------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `GenericResult`           | `ccflow.result`          | A generic result (holds anything).                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `DictResult`              | `ccflow.result`          | A generic dict (key/value) result.                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `ArrowResult`             | `ccflow.result.pyarrow`  | Holds an arrow table.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| `ArrowDateRangeResult`    | `ccflow.result.pyarrow`  | Extension of `ArrowResult` for representing a table over a date range that can be divided by date, such that generation of any sub-range of dates gives the same results as the original table filtered for those dates. |
| `NarwhalsResult`          | `ccflow.result.narwhals` | Holds a narwhals `DataFrame` or `LazyFrame`.                                                                                                                                                                             |
| `NarwhalsDataFrameResult` | `ccflow.result.narwhals` | Holds a narwhals eager `DataFrame`.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| `NumpyResult`             | `ccflow.result.numpy`    | Holds a numpy array.                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `PandasResult`            | `ccflow.result.pandas`   | Holds a pandas dataframe.                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `XArrayResult`            | `ccflow.result.xarray`   | Holds an xarray.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

Commit message:

Add NarwhalsFilePublisher (#93)
* Add NarwhalsFilePublisher.
* Improve consistency with rest of the code. Use narwhals.stable.v1 and use exttypes.narwhals.
* Require eager frame in NarwhalsFilePublisher.

Signed-off-by: Hin Tse <5867507+hintse@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/wiki/Key-Features.md, after:

- [Base Model](#base-model)
- [Callable Model](#callable-model)
- [Model Registry](#model-registry)
- [Models](#models)
- [Publishers](#publishers)
- [Evaluators](#evaluators)
- [Results](#results)

`ccflow` (Composable Configuration Flow) is a collection of tools for workflow configuration, orchestration, and dependency injection.
It is intended to be flexible enough to handle diverse use cases, including data retrieval, validation, transformation, and loading (i.e. ETL workflows), model training, microservice configuration, and automated report generation.

## Base Model

Central to `ccflow` is the `BaseModel` class.
`BaseModel` is the base class for models in the `ccflow` framework.
A model is basically a data class (class with attributes).
The naming was inspired by the open source library [Pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) (`BaseModel` actually inherits from the Pydantic base model class).

## Callable Model

`CallableModel` is the base class for a special type of `BaseModel` which can be called.
`CallableModel`'s are called with a context (something that derives from `ContextBase`) and returns a result (something that derives from `ResultBase`).
As an example, you may have a `SQLReader` callable model that when called with a `DateRangeContext` returns a `ArrowResult` (wrapper around a Arrow table) with data in the date range defined by the context by querying some SQL database.

## Model Registry

A `ModelRegistry` is a named collection of models.
A `ModelRegistry` can be loaded from YAML configuration, which means you can define a collection of models using YAML.
This is really powerful because this gives you a easy way to define a collection of Python objects via configuration.

## Models

Although you are free to define your own models (`BaseModel` implementations) to use in your flow graph,
`ccflow` comes with some models that you can use off the shelf to solve common problems. `ccflow` comes with a range of models for reading data.

The following table summarizes the available models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

## Publishers

`ccflow` also comes with a range of models for writing data.
These are referred to as publishers.
You can "chain" publishers and callable models using `PublisherModel` to call a `CallableModel` and publish the results in one step.
In fact, `ccflow` comes with several implementations of `PublisherModel` for common publishing use cases.

The following table summarizes the "publisher" models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

| Name                         | Path                | Description                                                                                                                                                 |
| :--------------------------- | :------------------ | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `DictTemplateFilePublisher`  | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to a file after populating a Jinja template.                                                                                                   |
| `GenericFilePublisher`       | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data using a generic "dump" Callable. Uses `smart_open` under the hood so that local and cloud paths are supported.                                 |
| `JSONPublisher`              | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to file in JSON format.                                                                                                                        |
| `PandasFilePublisher`        | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish a pandas data frame to a file using an appropriate method on pd.DataFrame. For large-scale exporting (using parquet), see `PandasParquetPublisher`. |
| `NarwhalsFilePublisher`      | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish a narwhals data frame to a file using an appropriate method on nw.DataFrame.                                                                        |
| `PicklePublisher`            | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to a pickle file.                                                                                                                              |
| `PydanticJSONPublisher`      | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish a pydantic model to a json file. See [Pydantic modeljson](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/serialization/#modelmodel_dump)                 |
| `YAMLPublisher`              | `ccflow.publishers` | Publish data to file in YAML format.                                                                                                                        |
| `CompositePublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Highly configurable, publisher that decomposes a pydantic BaseModel or a dictionary into pieces and publishes each piece separately.                        |
| `PrintPublisher`             | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data using python standard print.                                                                                                                     |
| `LogPublisher`               | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data using python standard logging.                                                                                                                   |
| `PrintJSONPublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data in JSON format.                                                                                                                                  |
| `PrintYAMLPublisher`         | `ccflow.publishers` | Print data in YAML format.                                                                                                                                  |
| `PrintPydanticJSONPublisher` | `ccflow.publishers` | Print pydantic model as json. See https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/concepts/serialization/#modelmodel_dump_json                                             |
| `ArrowDatasetPublisher`      | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PandasDeltaPublisher`       | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `EmailPublisher`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MatplotlibFilePublisher`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MLFlowArtifactPublisher`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `MLFlowPublisher`            | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PandasParquetPublisher`     | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `PlotlyFilePublisher`        | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |
| `XArrayPublisher`            | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                                             |

## Evaluators

`ccflow` comes with "evaluators" that allows you to evaluate (i.e. run) `CallableModel` s in different ways.

The following table summarizes the "evaluator" models.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Some models are still in the process of being open sourced.

| Name                                | Path                | Description                                                                                                                    |
| :---------------------------------- | :------------------ | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `LazyEvaluator`                     | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that only actually runs the callable once an attribute of the result is queried (by hooking into `__getattribute__`) |
| `LoggingEvaluator`                  | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that logs information about evaluating the callable.                                                                 |
| `MemoryCacheEvaluator`              | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that caches results in memory.                                                                                       |
| `MultiEvaluator`                    | `ccflow.evaluators` | An evaluator that combines multiple evaluators.                                                                                |
| `GraphEvaluator`                    | `ccflow.evaluators` | Evaluator that evaluates the dependency graph of callable models in topologically sorted order.                                |
| `ChunkedDateRangeEvaluator`         | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ChunkedDateRangeResultsAggregator` | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayChunkedDateRangeEvaluator`      | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `DependencyTrackingEvaluator`       | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `DiskCacheEvaluator`                | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ParquetCacheEvaluator`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayCacheEvaluator`                 | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayGraphEvaluator`                 | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RayDelayedDistributedEvaluator`    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `ParquetCacheEvaluator`             | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |
| `RetryEvaluator`                    | *Coming Soon!*      |                                                                                                                                |

## Results

A Result is an object that holds the results from a callable model. It provides the equivalent of a strongly typed dictionary where the keys and schema are known upfront.

The following table summarizes the "result" models.

| Name                      | Path                     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| :------------------------ | :----------------------- | :----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `GenericResult`           | `ccflow.result`          | A generic result (holds anything).                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `DictResult`              | `ccflow.result`          | A generic dict (key/value) result.                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| `ArrowResult`             | `ccflow.result.pyarrow`  | Holds an arrow table.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| `ArrowDateRangeResult`    | `ccflow.result.pyarrow`  | Extension of `ArrowResult` for representing a table over a date range that can be divided by date, such that generation of any sub-range of dates gives the same results as the original table filtered for those dates. |
| `NarwhalsResult`          | `ccflow.result.narwhals` | Holds a narwhals `DataFrame` or `LazyFrame`.                                                                                                                                                                             |
| `NarwhalsDataFrameResult` | `ccflow.result.narwhals` | Holds a narwhals eager `DataFrame`.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| `NumpyResult`             | `ccflow.result.numpy`    | Holds a numpy array.                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| `PandasResult`            | `ccflow.result.pandas`   | Holds a pandas dataframe.                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| `XArrayResult`            | `ccflow.result.xarray`   | Holds an xarray.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
